Make OpenEBS as a helm extension (#3651)
k0sproject/k0s: docs/examples/openebs.md

# OpenEBS

> This tutorial covers the installation of OpenEBS as a helm chart, both from
> scratch and how to migrate it to a helm extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial covers the installation of OpenEBS as a Helm extension, both from
scratch and how to migrate it from a storage extension.
```

## Installing OpenEBS from scratch

**WARNING**: Do not configure OpenEBS both as a storage extension and helm
extension. Because this is considered an invalid configuration k0s will ignore
the configuration file entirely in order to prevent accidental upgrades or
downgrades. The chart objects defined in the API will still have normal behavior.

OpenEBS can be installed as a helm chart by adding it as an extension to your configuration:

```yaml
  extensions:
    helm:
      repositories:
      - name: openebs-internal
        url: https://openebs.github.io/charts
      charts:
      - name: openebs
        chartname: openebs-internal/openebs
        version: "3.9.0"
        namespace: openebs
        order: 1
        values: |
          localprovisioner:
            hostpathClass:
              enabled: true
              isDefaultClass: false
```

If you want OpenEBS to be your default storage class set `isDefaultClass` to `true`.

> ## Migrating bundled OpenEBS to helm extension

Reviewer: Can we have an integration test that tests the migration? I'm not sure yet how the managed extension file will disappear from the helm folder of existing controllers, and how it will be prevented to be purged by the manifest applier. We should remove the stack annotation from the existing chart, too.

Reviewer 2: I second to have an integration test for this.

The bundled OpenEBS extension is already a helm extension installed as a
`chart.helm.k0sproject.io` object in the kubernetes apiserver.

For this reason all we need to do is modifying the storage in the configuration
storage type to `external_storage` instead of `openebs_local_storage`.

If you are using [dynamic configuration](https://github.com/k0sproject/k0s/pull/3651) you can run this command:

```shell
kubectl patch clusterconfig -n kube-system  k0s --patch '{"spec":{"extensions":{"storage":{"type":"external_storage"}}}}' --type=merge
```

If you are using a configuration replace `spec.extensions.storage.type` from
`openebs_local_storage` to `external_storage` in all control plane nodes.

> For clusters configured with a file ratehr than dynamic config it's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For clusters configured with a file rather than dynamic config it's
```

the configuration to prevent accidental upgrades or downgrades. The chart
objects defined in the API will still behave normally.

OpenEBS can be installed as a helm chart by adding it as an extension to your configuration:

```yaml
  extensions:
    helm:
      repositories:
      - name: openebs-internal
        url: https://openebs.github.io/charts
      charts:
      - name: openebs
        chartname: openebs-internal/openebs
        version: "3.9.0"
        namespace: openebs
        order: 1
        values: |
          localprovisioner:
            hostpathClass:
              enabled: true
              isDefaultClass: false
```

If you want OpenEBS to be your default storage class set `isDefaultClass` to `true`.

## Migrating bundled OpenEBS to helm extension

The bundled OpenEBS extension is already a helm extension installed as a
`chart.helm.k0sproject.io`, for this reason all we need to do is removing the
manifests and cleaning the object. However this must be done in a specific order
to prevent data loss.

**WARNING**: Not following the steps in the precise order presented by the
documentation may provoke data loss.

> The first step to perform the migration is disabling the applier-manager component
> in every controller. For every controller, stop the controller and start it again
> with the flag `--disable-components=applier-manager`. If you already had this flag
> set it to `--disable-components=<previous value>,applier-manager`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step to perform the migration is to disable the `applier-manager`
component on all controllers. For each controller, restart the controller with
the flag `--disable-components=applier-manager`. If you already had this flag,
set it to `--disable-components=<previous value>,applier-manager`.
```

> Once the applier-manager is disabled in every running controller, you need to modify
> the configuration to use `external_storage` instead of `openebs_local_storage`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the `applier-manager` is disabled on all controllers, you need to modify
the k0s configuration to use `external_storage` instead of
`openebs_local_storage`.
```

> If you are using [dynamic configuration](../dynamic-configuration.md) you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using [dynamic configuration](../dynamic-configuration.md), you can
```

change it with this command:

```shell
kubectl patch clusterconfig -n kube-system  k0s --patch '{"spec":{"extensions":{"storage":{"type":"external_storage"}}}}' --type=merge
```

> If you are using a static configuration file replace `spec.extensions.storage.type`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using a static configuration file, replace `spec.extensions.storage.type`
```

from `openebs_local_storage` to `external_storage` in all control plane nodes and
restart all the control plane nodes one by one.

When the configuration is set to `external_storage` and the servers are
restarted, you must manage the it as a chart object in the API:

```shell
kubectl get chart -n kube-system k0s-addon-chart-openebs -o yaml
```

> First remove the labels and annotations related to the stack applier:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, remove the labels and annotations related to the stack applier:
```

```shell
k0s kc annotate -n kube-system chart k0s-addon-chart-openebs k0s.k0sproject.io/stack-checksum-
k0s kc label -n kube-system chart k0s-addon-chart-openebs k0s.k0sproject.io/stack-
```

> After the annotations and labels are removed, remove the manifest file **in every controller**.
> This file is located in
> `<k0s base directory>/manifests/helm/<number>_helm_extension_openebs.yaml`
> which in most installations defaults to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the annotations and labels are removed, remove the manifest file **on each
controller**. This file is located in
`<k0s-data-dir>/manifests/helm/<number>_helm_extension_openebs.yaml`, which in
most installations defaults to
```

`/var/lib/k0s/manifests/helm/0_helm_extension_openebs.yaml`.

> **WARNING**: Leaving the old manifest file may cause the manifest applied to
> revert your changes, resulting in potential data loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**WARNING**: Not removing the old manifest file from all controllers may cause
the manifest to be reapplied, reverting your changes and potentially causing
data loss.
```

> Finally we want to restart every controller without the flag `--disable-components=applier-manager`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we need to re-enable the `applier-manager` and restart all controllers
without the `--disable-components=applier-manager` flag.
```

> Once the migration is coplete it's recommended to upgrade to OpenEBS 3.9.0:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the migration is complete, you'll be able to update the OpenEBS chart.
Let's take v3.9.0 as an example:
```

```shell

> kubectl patch clusterconfig -n kube-system k0s --patch '{"spec":{"extensions":{"storage":{"type":"external_storage"}}}}' --type=merge

Reviewer: That looks like copy-pasta :sweat_smile:

```

## Usage

> Once installed The cluster will have two storage classes available for you to use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once installed, the cluster will have two storage classes:
```

```shell
k0s kubectl get storageclass
```

```shell
NAME               PROVISIONER        RECLAIMPOLICY   VOLUMEBINDINGMODE      ALLOWVOLUMEEXPANSION   AGE
openebs-device     openebs.io/local   Delete          WaitForFirstConsumer   false                  24s
openebs-hostpath   openebs.io/local   Delete          WaitForFirstConsumer   false                  24s
```

> The `openebs-hostpath` is the storage class that maps to the `/var/openebs/local`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `openebs-hostpath` is the storage class that maps to `/var/openebs/local`.
```

> The `openebs-device` is not configured and could be configured by [manifest deployer](../manifests.md) accordingly to the [OpenEBS documentation](https://docs.openebs.io/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `openebs-device` is not configured and could be configured by the [manifest
deployer](../manifests.md) according to the [OpenEBS
documentation](https://docs.openebs.io/).
```

### Example

> Use following manifests as an example of pod with mounted volume:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following manifests as an example of a pod with a mounted volume:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: nginx-pvc
  namespace: default
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  storageClassName: openebs-hostpath
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 5Gi
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: nginx
  namespace: default
  labels:
    app: nginx
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: nginx
  strategy:
    type: Recreate
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: nginx
        name: nginx
        volumeMounts:
        - name: persistent-storage
          mountPath: /var/lib/nginx
      volumes:
      - name: persistent-storage
        persistentVolumeClaim:
          claimName: nginx-pvc
```

> ```shell
> k0s kubectl apply -f nginx.yaml
> ```
> 
> ```shell
> persistentvolumeclaim/nginx-pvc created
> deployment.apps/nginx created
> bash-5.1# k0s kc get pods
> NAME                    READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
> nginx-d95bcb7db-gzsdt   1/1     Running   0          30s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
$ k0s kubectl apply -f nginx.yaml
persistentvolumeclaim/nginx-pvc created
deployment.apps/nginx created

$ k0s kc get pods
NAME                    READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
nginx-d95bcb7db-gzsdt   1/1     Running   0          30s
```

```

> ```shell
> k0s kubectl get pv
> ```
> 
> ```shell
> NAME                                       CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   RECLAIM POLICY   STATUS   CLAIM               STORAGECLASS       REASON   AGE
> pvc-9a7fae2d-eb03-42c3-aaa9-1a807d5df12f   5Gi        RWO            Delete           Bound    default/nginx-pvc   openebs-hostpath            30s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
$ k0s kubectl get pv
NAME                                       CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   RECLAIM POLICY   STATUS   CLAIM               STORAGECLASS       REASON   AGE
pvc-9a7fae2d-eb03-42c3-aaa9-1a807d5df12f   5Gi        RWO            Delete           Bound    default/nginx-pvc   openebs-hostpath            30s
```
